David C. Wyld et al. (Eds): SIGV, AI & FL, SESBC , MLAEDU, DSCC, NLPTT, SCOM, SCM , CEEE - 2022  
pp. 191 -201, 2022. CS & IT  - CSCP 2022                                                                DOI: 10.5121/csit.2022.122 215  
HARDWARE ACCELERATION OF LANE 
DETECTION  ALGORITHM : A GPU  VERSUS 
FPGA  COMPARISON   
 
Mohamed Alshemi1, Sherif Saif2 and Mohamed Taher3 
 
1Computer and Systems Engineering Department ,  
Ain Shams University, Cairo , Egypt  
1STMicroelectronics, Cairo, Egypt  
2Compu ter and Systems Department,  
Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt  
3Computer and Systems Engineering Department,  
Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt  
 
ABSTRACT  
 
A Complete Computer vision system can be divided into two main categories: detection and 
classification. The  Lane detection algorithm is a part of the computer vision detection category 
and has been applied in autonomous driving and smart vehicle systems. The lane detection 
system is responsible for lane marking in a complex road environment. At the same time, lane 
detection plays a crucial role in the warning system for a car when departs the lane. The 
implemented lane detection algorithm is mainly divided into two steps: edge detection and line 
detection. In this paper, we will compare the st ate-of-the-art implementation performance 
obtained with both FPGA and GPU to evaluate the trade -off for latency, power consumption, 
and utilization. Our comparison emphasises the advantages and disadvantages of the two 
systems.  
 
KEYWORDS  
 
Lane Detecti on, C omputer Vision, FPGA, GPU,  CUDA . 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
The problem  of lane detection  has long been  an important  part of driver  assistance  systems  
(ADAS).  As the first step in road segmentation,  lane detection  facilitates  scene  understanding  for 
intelligent  vehicl es. For example,  many  vehicle  functions  require  lane detection,  such as lane 
departure  warning  (LDW),  adaptive  cruise  control,  lane centring,  and lane change  assist.  There  
have  been  some  advances  in the lane detection  problem  in recent  years.  
 
Due to the c omputational complexity of the lane detection algorithm, power consumption can be 
high to achieve real -time performance in a lane detection solution. While power is not a concern 
for all designs, low power solutions are often required for embedded or edge computing 
solutions. In the past, computationally complex image processing has been performed using 
graphical processing units (GPUs), but due to advances in field programmable gate array (FPGA) 
technology these tasks have become more viable with lower pow er consumption FPGA devices.  
So through this paper, two lane detection hardware implementation solutions are developed and 
compared. One solution is implemented on a ZYNQ -7 ZC706 Evaluation Board FPGA [1] and 
192         Computer Science & Information Technol ogy (CS & IT)  
the other solution is implemented on Google Co lab NVidia K80 Super GPU [2]. The 
implementation for both FPGA and GPU will be shown in Figure  1. 
 
The implementation includes the following steps.  
 
Step 1: Sobel edge detection for a gray image.  
Step 2: Applying the image binarization.  
Step 3: Obtaining t he Hough matrix as a result of the Hough transform.  
Step 4: MATLAB functions are used to process the Hough matrix to draw the lane lines.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Lane Detection implementation overview  
 
2. THE ALGORITHM EMPLOYED FOR LANE DETECTION  
 
Lane detection is di vided into three parts [3].  
 
2.1. Sobel Edge Detection  
 
The Sobel edge detection algorithm is used to extract features from images like edges [4]. It 
works by calculating the image intensity gradient for each pixel within the image. It finds the 
direction of the largest change from light to dark and the change rating in that direction, so the 
result shows how the image changes abruptly or smoothly at each pixel, and therefore how much 
that pixel looks like an edge and it also shows how the orientation of th at edge is.  The output 
from applying a Sobel filter to a pixel on an edge is a vector that changes across the edge from 
darker to brighter values.  
 
The Sobel filter uses two 3 x 3 matrix kernels  as shown in F igure 2 . One for calculating the 
changes in the horizontal direction, and the other for calculating the changes in the vertical 
direction. The two kernels are convolved with the original gray pixel image to calculate the 
derivative approximations. Where the approximated magnitude is  
 
G|Sx * Img||Sy * Img| 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        193 
 
 
Figure 2. Sobel kernels coefficients for edge detection  
 
2.2. Image Binarization  
 
The purpose of image binarization is to binarize images before further processing. Following that, 
all of the image's pixels will ei ther be 255 or 0 (a pixel is normally represented by 8 unsigned 
bits, making 255 the highest value in the 8 -bit data format).  
 
2.3. Hough Transform  
 
After image binarization, the Hough transform is used to detect the two lines of the lane [4]. The 
Hough transfo rm is the most important technique to find shapes in images. It has been 
specifically used to extract c ircles,  lines, and random shapes . In other words, the Hough 
transform algorithm has been recognized as a promising technique for shape and motion analysi s 
in images, so the Hough transform is an ideal algorithm for line detection [5]. A line is 
represented by the following equation:  
 
yaxb  
 
In [r,
 ] coordinates, a line can be:  
r
  
 
 
Where parameter 
  is the angle of the line, and parameter r is the distance from the line to the 
origin. Thus, the line can be represented by a single point of Polar (r,
 ) coordinate in Hough 
space. In this way, a line in the C artesian (x, y) coordinate system can be mapped to a single 
point in (r,
 ) Hough space, as indicated in Fig ure 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Mapping of single  line to the Hough space  
 
Conversely,  a point  in the (x, y)  coordinate  system  represents  all lines  passing  through  that point.  
This way a point  maps  all possible  lines  that pass through  it in Hough  space. As shown in Fig ure 
4, a point maps to a line that looks like a sinewave in the Hough space [5].  
194         Computer Science & Information Technol ogy (CS & IT)  
 
 
Figure 4. Mapping of crossed  lines to the Hough spa ce 
 
To recognize  straight lines inside an image, each point in the binarized generated image votes to 
its corresponding possible lines, which are pairs of (r,
 ) in Hough space. After processing each 
pixel in the input image, an accumulator arra y is generated. The line with the largest count value 
denotes the line with the most pixels on it. The process of picking the line with the most pixel 
value is called Hough Peak which is done in Matlab.  
 
3. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION ON FPGA  
 
3.1. Sobel Edge D etectio n FPGA I mplementation  
 
After receiving the gray image, the first step is doing the zero padding for the original image to 
ensure that the output image size is the same as the input image.  
 
A general architecture to perform kernel -based convolution computat ion is shown in Fig ure 5. 
The Sobel filter is implemented using adders and left shifters as Sobel filter parameters merely 
have three forms: 1, 2, and 0.  
 
Replacing multipliers with left shifting by 1 to realize multiplication by 2 helps in reducing 
resou rce utilization on hardware (Area optimization).  
 
 
 
Figure 5. FPGA implementation of Sobel edge detection  
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        195 
3.2. Image Binarization FPGA Implementation  
 
Image binarization on hardware is implemented by using a multiplexer and an unsigned 
comparator as shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. FPGA implementation of image binarization  
 
3.3. Hough Transform FPGA Implementation  
 
For each pixel equal to 255 after the binarization, lines from all possible directions are counted. 
The range  of the line angles is [0, 180]  and the dist ance from the origin for each angle is 
determined using the structure shown in Figure 7, which can be considered  as the Hough 
transform's f undamental processing element . The degree resolution is 1 degree between angles, 
hence 180 such processing elements a re needed to compute for 180 degrees range. The result of 
each processing element is accumulated and stored in memory [6].  
 
Figure 7 shows that  each processing element cell needs two multipliers, and a total of 180 such 
processing elements are used, result ing in using 360 multipliers. We further optimize the usage of 
multipliers by adjusting  the propertie s of sine and cosine functions [7]. Such properties are 
expressed in the following equations:  
 
 = 
   
 = - 
   
 
Where Ө1 + Ө2 = 180, sin (Ө1) = sin (Ө2), and cos (Ө1) = -cos (Ө2). In other words, once sin 
(Ө1) and cos (Ө1) are calculated, sin (Ө2) and cos (Ө2) can be done by simple add/minus 
operations. In this way, only 180 multiplier s are used instead of 360, saving 50% of the total 
number of multipliers.  
 
196         Computer Science & Information Technol ogy (CS & IT)  
 
 
Figure 7. FPGA implementation of Hough transform  
 
4. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION ON GPU  
 
Our GPU implementation was based on Google Colab NVidia Tesla K80 Super GPU connected 
to a host CPU via PCIe . The GPU has 4992 NVIDIA CUDA cores with a base clock of 562 MHz  
it has 12GB global memory operating on a memory clock of 1253 MHz  CUDA was used to 
program the GPU.  
 
With less modifications to C, NVidia's Compute Unified Device Framework (CUDA ) offers a 
general architecture for GPUs that enables  flexible programming. CUDA’s view of a GPU has 
plentiful Streaming Multiprocessors. Each multiprocessor has a shared memory which is a fast 
local memory shared by its streaming processors. All multiproc essors also have access to a global 
or device memory. A thread block can be formed by many threads on a streaming multiprocessor. 
A thread block maps to a Streaming Multiprocessor physically although the threads number 
inside a block can be bigger than the  number of Streaming processors, in which case threads are 
split into multiple warps where only one warp is active at a time. Active threads can execute the 
same instruction in parallel.  
 
The components of the Lane Detection must be carefully mapped to the  GPU computing 
architecture in order to make optimum use of GPU computing resources and to reduce the access 
cost of device memory access.  
 
Two principles guided our mapping:  
 
1. Avoid unnecessary device memory access and prefer shared memory for repeated 
memory access and  
2. Avoid branches to keep all the processors doing useful computation work.  
 
Currently available GPUs have a limited amount of shared memory per multiprocessor, with the 
majority of them providing roughly 48KB  of shared memory per block [8]. 
 
4.1. Sobel Edge Detection GPU Implementation  
 
After receiving the gray image, we start with doing the zero padding for the original image and 
store it inside the device memory then we use a 2D grid which contains a 2D Block with a size of 
16*16 threads, as in t he following equation  
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        197 

 
 
 
Figure 8. GPU block diagram of grid thread blocks  
 
Where width  and height  are the dimensions of the original gray image. Each block will perform 
the Sobel operator convolution on the gray  image and all the grid blocks will perform the 
computations in parallel.  
 
4.2. Image Binarization GPU Implementation  
 
Each block thread will be responsible for the threshold of the post -Sobel pixels to be 255 or 0.  
 
4.3. Hough Transform GPU Implementation  
 
The Hou gh transform voting space (r,
 ) is divided into partitions for each 
  and the voting 
method  for each partition is performed concurrently . A thread block in the GPU implementation 
[9], is assigned to each 
  where threads in the thread block concurrently vote for input post -
binarization pixels. Partitioning the voting space for each 
  where each voting space can be 
stored in the shared memory. Therefore, the voting mechanism is performed to the voting space 
in the block shared memory. In the GPU implementation, the voting space is partitioned into 180 
spaces where thread blocks can vote in parallel. The values of the trigonometric functions cos 
  
and sin 
  are initially computed in each th read block since the values are commonly used for 
every thread in a thread block. Then threads read the coordinates of input pixels stored in the 
global memory.  
 
Some  threads may vote to the same r simultaneously  in the parallel voting procedure . To avoid  it, 
we use the atomic add operation supported by CUDA [10].  
 
 
 
 
198         Computer Science & Information Technol ogy (CS & IT)  
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
 
The two systems’ performance was evaluated based on latency, power consumption, and resource 
utilization.  
 
1- Latency was measured for both implementations between the firs t valid pixel of the 
image entering the system and the generation of the Hough Matrix.  
2- Power was measured for both implementations as an average power using the devices’ 
specific tools.  
3- Memory resource utilization for both implementations was measured fo r the Hough 
transform as BRAM memory in FPGA and shared memory in GPU.  
 
The results obtained for the proposed lane detection algorithm for the gray image in F igure 9 and 
the Sobel detection and binarization output for both implementations as in F igure 10. Some 
MATLAB built -in functions were used to detect the Hough peaks  as in F igure 11. For the Hough 
Matrix generated from both FPGA and GPU and Hough lines  as in F igure 12 to draw the lane 
lines.  
 
Table 1 shows the resource utilization of the Lane Detection  Algorithm on ZYNQ -7 ZC706 
Evaluation Board FPGA for 100 MHz frequency whereas Table 2 shows the performance 
comparison of the Lane Detection Algorithm between FPGA and GPU.  
 
 
 
Figure 9. [512 x 512] pixel gray image  
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        199 
 
 
Figure 10. Image after Sobel detecti on and binarization  
 
 
 
Figure 11. Matlab Hough peaks for Hough Matrix  
 
 
 
Figure 12. Matlab drawing of lane lines  
200         Computer Science & Information Technol ogy (CS & IT)  
Table 1. The resources utilization on ZYNQ -7 ZC706 FPGA  
 
Resources  Utilization  Available  Percentage %  
LUT  20022  218600  9.159195  
FF 9439  437200 2.158966  
BRAM  180 725 24.8 
DSP  180 900 20.0 
 
Table 2. the performance comparison of THE Lane Detection Algorithm between FPGA and GPU  
 
 GPU  FPGA  
Model  Tesla K80  ZYNQ -7 ZC706 Evaluation Board  
latency  4.874000ms  2.62ms  
Power Consumption  74.22 W  1.619 W  
utilization  6.5 MB memory  2.88 MB memory  
 
6. CONCLUSION  
 
In this paper, two implementations of lane detection were developed on two different forms of 
hardware acceleration. The two forms of hardware acceleration used were an FPGA and a GPU 
and tests were performed  using  only the acceleration  portion  of the lane detection  algorithm.  
 
Tests  show  low latency  for FPGAs,  low relative  memory  resource  consumption  for GPUs,  and 
low power  consumption  for FPGAs.  GPUs  handle  resolution  scaling  as well or better  than 
FPGAs  in terms  of memory  resource  consumption.  FPGAs  handle  resolution  scaling  as well or 
better  than GPUs  in terms  of latency.  If your project  will be implemented  in this work  and you 
need  high resolution  which  may be needed  later in the project  then GPU  is probably  the better  
choice.  If performance  and latency  are critical  and resolution  may be limited,  FPGAs  are 
probably  a better  choice.  
 
Finally, t he results showed that FPGA has better results than the GPU for [512x512] pixel images 
for Latency, pow er consumption, and resource utilization but GPU will handle the resolution 
scaling better than the FPGA with regards memory resource consumption.  
 
7. FUTURE WORK 
 
In future work, it would be beneficial to use canny edge detector instead of Sobel edge detecto r 
and analyze its effect on the performance of the output image after the edge detection.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] Xilinx Inc, “ZC706 Evaluation Board for the Zynq -7000 XC7Z045 SoC User Guide (v1.8).” 2019.  
[2] S. Mittal and J. S. Vetter, “A survey of CPU -GPU het erogeneous computing techniques,” ACM 
Computing Surveys, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 1 –35, 2015.  
[3] C. Lee and J. -H. Moon, “Robust lane detection and tracking for real -time applications,” IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 4043 –4048, 2018.  
[4] R. C. Gonzalez and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing. Uttar Pradesh, India: Pearson, 2018.  
[5] Y.  Zhou,  “Computer Vision System -On-Chip Designs for Intelligent Vehicles,” Ph.D. dissertation, 
UC Davis, 2018.  
[6] D. Northcote , L. H. Crockett, and P. Murray, “FPGA implementation of a memory -efficient Hough 
parameter space for the detection of lines,” 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and 
Systems (ISCAS), 2018.  
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        201 
[7] X. Zhou, Y. Ito, and K. Nakano, “An efficient imple mentation of the Hough transform using DSP 
slices and block rams on the FPGA,” 2013 IEEE 7th International Symposium on Embedded 
Multicore Socs, 2013.  
[8] “Cuda C++ Programming Guide,” NVIDIA Documentati on Center. [Online]. Available: 
https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda -c-programming -guide/index.html. [Accessed: 04 -Nov-2022].  
[9] S. Bagchi and T. -J. Chin, “Event -based star tracking via multiresolution progressive Hough 
transforms,” 2020 IEEE Winter Confere nce on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2020.  
[10] X. Zhou, N. Tomagou, Y. Ito, and K. Nakano, “Implementations of the hough transform on the 
embedded multicore processors,” International Journal of Networking and Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, 
pp. 174 –188, 2014.  
 
 
© 2022 By AIRCC Publishing Corporation . This article is published under the Creative 
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.  
